Add a breaking change/migration for `Paint.enableDithering`. (#9362)
flutter/website: src/release/breaking-changes/paint-enableDithering.md

---
title: Paint.enableDithering is now true by default.
description: >
  Deprecation of user-configurable `Paint.enableDithering`.
---

## Summary

[`Paint.enableDithering`][] is now `true` by default (previously, `false`),
and is _deprecated_ pending removal - Flutter no longer supports
user-configurable dithering settings.

In addition, the dithering documentation states support is _only_ for gradients.

## Background

[`Paint.enableDithering`][] was added as a global option in [PR 13868][] as
a response to [Issue 44134][], which reported that gradients in Flutter had
visible banding artifacts:

> Gradients currently have a lot of color banding on all devices, and it looks
> very weird when using the pulse animation too. A solution is to make the
> gradients opaque, and to use dithered gradients with Skia. Dithered gradients
> aren't currently exposed, so adding a dither parameter to dart:ui's Paint
> class would be nice. We'd be able to manually draw our gradients with a
> CustomPainter.

![Example of banding](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/30870216/210907719-4f4a1a8d-e28a-4d39-9e99-3635a26a0c74.png)

> In [Issue 118073][], it was reported that gradients in our new [Impeller][]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Issue 118073][] reported that gradients in our new [Impeller][]
```

> backend that banding artifacts were visible in some gradients, and later

Reviewer: ```suggestion
backend displayed visible banding artifacts in some gradients.
It was later discovered that Impeller didn't support the (rarely used)
[`Paint.enableDithering`][1] property.
```

> discovered the (rarely used) [`Paint.enableDithering`][] setting was not
> supported in Impeller.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

After adding dithering support to Impeller ([PR 44181][], [PR 44331][],

> [PR 44522][]), and reviewing the perfomance impact of dithering (negligble),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[PR 44522][]), and reviewing the perfomance impact of dithering (negligible),
the following observations were made:
```

> and:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

1. Consensus that gradients look good by default: [Issue 112498][].
1. Having a global option was intended to be deprecated: [PR 13868][].

> ... it was decided that Flutter would:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This resulted in the following decisions:
```

1. Make dithering enabled by default.
1. Deprecate the global option.
1. Remove the global option in a future release.

> As part of that process, the ability for dithering to effect anything other than

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As part of that process, the ability for dithering to affect anything other than
```

gradients was removed in [PR 44730][], [PR 44912][]. That was done to ease the
process of migrating, because Impeller will never support dithering for anything
but gradients.

## Migration guide

Most users and libraries will not need to make any changes.

> For users that maintain golden tests, you may need to update your golden images

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For users that maintain golden tests, you might need to update your golden images
```

to reflect the new default. For example, if you use [`matchesGoldenFile`][]
to test a widget that contains a gradient:

```shell
flutter test --update-goldens
```

> Not expected to be a common case, but to disable dithering temporarily, you can
> do so by setting the `enableDithering` property in your `main()` (either in an
> app or test):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not expected to be a common case, but you can disable dithering temporarily
by setting the `enableDithering` property in your `main()` method (either in an
app or test):
```

```diff
void main() {
+ // TODO: Remove this after XYZ.
+ Paint.enableDithering = false;

  runApp(MyApp());
}
```

As the plan is to _permanently_ remove the `enableDithering` property, please
provide feedback in [Issue 112498][] if you have a use case that requires
disabling dithering (due to performance, crashes).

If for some reason you _must_ draw gradients without dithering, you'll need to
write your own custom shader. Describing that is out of the scope of this
migration guide, but you can find some resources and examples:

- [Writing and using fragment shaders][]

> - [`hsl_linear_gradient.frag`]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`hsl_linear_gradient.frag`][]
```

> - [`linear_gradient_ssbo_fill.frag`]

Reviewer 2: This is sort of a bad example because it uses features that aren't exposed in the regular fragment program API.  A better example might be something like:

https://github.com/jonahwilliams/awesome_gradients/blob/main/shaders/hsl_linear_gradient.frag

Author: Oh ok, great, thanks for pointing that out! Fixed.
